docs/docs/varstate.md, before:

# The Variational State Interface

A central element of NetKet is the {class}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState` interface.
A Variational State represents an approximate, variational description of a system, and can be used to
probe it.

As of now, NetKet has two types of Variational state implementations:

- {class}`~netket.vqs.MCState`, which is a classical variational approximation of a pure state.
- {class}`~netket.vqs.MCMixedState`, which is a classical variational approximation of a mixed state.
- {class}`~netket.vqs.FullSumState`, which is a version of {class}`~netket.vqs.MCState` without sampling, performing the full summation over the whole Hilbert space and computing expectation values and gradients exactly.

It is our plan to build upon this interface for new kind of variational states in the future. For example, we
are interested in implementing a new kind of variational state that encodes a state into a Qiskit circuit.

## Constructing a Variational State

To construct the two variational states above you need to provide at least a Monte Carlo sampler (you can find the list of available ones [here](netket_sampler_api)) and a model.
The Hilbert space of the variational state will be inferred from the sampler, which contains a reference to the underlying Hilbert space.

The model can be specified in several ways. The most standard way is to pass a [Flax Linen Module](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.linen.html#module), but you can also pass a Jax-style pair
of functions {code}`(init, apply)` or an haiku module obtained by calling {code}`haiku.transform()`.
It's also easy to use another jax-based framework with NetKet (though it's not yet documented). If you
want to do that, you can have a look at the automatic conversion [code](https://github.com/netket/netket/tree/master/netket/utils/model_frameworks) and get in touch with us.

:::{warning}
Initializing a Variational State with non-Flax modules is still experimental. Complex modules,
especially if mutable, might not work. If you have problems don't hesitate opening issues on
GitHub so that we can address them. They are mostly easy fixes.
:::

### Defining models: Flax

In general, the most-well supported way to define Models for NetKet is through Flax.

If you are not familiar with Flax, it's a package that allows to define Neural Networks or other
parametrized functions. While we suggest to read carefully the [introduction to Flax](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/flax_basics.html), if you are impatient and just want to define some simple, easy
models you can find some examples in the [Model Surgery](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/howtos/model_surgery.html) section of Flax documentation.

Other examples can be found in the source of the [Pre-built models](netket_models_api) distributed with NetKet, such as
{class}`~netket.models.RBM` (the simplest one), {class}`~netket.models.MPSPeriodic` and {class}`~netket.models.NDM` for
more complicated examples.

:::{warning}
Flax modules do not always work well with complex numbers. For that reason, if your model has complex
parameters we invite you to use {code}`netket.nn` in place of {code}`flax.linen` and {code}`flax.nn`.

{code}`netket.nn` re-exports some Flax functionality ensuring that it works nicely with complex numbers.
If you don't find something from Flax in {code}`netket.nn`, please [open an issue](https://github.com/netket/netket/issues) in GitHub.
:::

### MCState

Let's now assume we have a Flax module, {class}`~netket.models.RBM` and we want to construct a variational state
on sampled with a simple {func}`~netket.sampler.MetropolisLocal` sampler.

To do this, first you need to construct the model and the sampler, and then you can pass them, together with several
parameters, to the constructor.

```python
hilbert = nk.hilbert.Spin(0.5)**10

sampler = nk.sampler.MetropolisLocal(hilbert)

model = nk.models.RBM(alpha=1, param_dtype=float, kernel_init=nn.initializers.normal(stddev=0.01))

vstate = nk.vqs.MCState(sampler, model, n_samples=500)
```

When constructed, the variational state will call the model's init method to generate the state and the
parameters, and will also initialize the sampler.

When constructing a variational state you can also pass a seed, that will be used to initialize both the
weights and the sampler. You can also pass two different seeds for the sampler and the weights.

(warn-chunking)=

:::{warning}
Sometimes you might be working on very large models that run on GPUs, or you might want to compute expectation values with a very high number of samples, which might cause out-of-memory errors. To prevent this, {code}`MCState` exposes the attribute {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.chunk_size`, which controls the size of the chunks used in the forward and backward computation of expectation values.

When this value is set, computations are not performed on huge matrices, but instead we split the inputs into smaller matrices and loop through them. In general, setting {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.chunk_size` to a low value will address the majority of memory issues, but will increase the computational cost.

A value of at least 128 is suggested, but will greatly depend on your model. You should try to use the largest value you can for your system. Setting it to {code}`None` is equivalent to setting it to infinity.
:::

## Using a Monte Carlo Variational State

### Expectation values

One you have a variational state, you can do many things with it.
First of all, you can probe expectation values:

```
Ĥ = nk.operator.Ising(hilbert, nk.graph.Chain(hilbert.size), h=0.5)

vstate.expect(Ĥ)

>>> -4.98 ± 0.14 [σ²=9.51, R̂=1.0006]
```

Notice that if you call multiple times {code}`expect`, the same set of
samples will be used, and you will get the same result. To force sampling
to happen again, you can call {py:meth}`~netket.vqs.MCState.sample`.

```
vstate.expect(Ĥ)

>>> -4.98 ± 0.14 [σ²=9.51, R̂=1.0006]

vstate.sample();

vstate.expect(Ĥ)

>>> -4.90 ± 0.14 [σ²=9.54, R̂=1.0062]
```

The set of the last sampled samples can be accessed from the attribute
{py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.samples`. If you access the samples
from this attribute, but you haven't sampled already, {code}`sample()` will
be called automatically.

Note that when you update the parameters, the samples are automatically
discarded.

Parameters can be accessed through the attribute {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState.parameters`,
and you can modify them by assigning a new set of parameters to this attribute.

Note that parameters cannot in general be modified in place, as they are
of type `FrozenDict` (they are frozen, aka can't be modified). A typical way
to modify them, for example to add 0.1 to all parameters is to do the following:

```python
import jax

# See the value of some parameters
vstate.parameters['visible_bias']

>>> DeviceArray([-0.10806808, -0.14987472,  0.13069461,  0.0125838 ,
              0.06278384,  0.00275547,  0.05843748,  0.07516951,
              0.21897993, -0.01632223], dtype=float64)

vstate.parameters = jax.tree_map(lambda x: x+0.1, vstate.parameters)

# Look at the new values
vstate.parameters['visible_bias']
>>> DeviceArray([-0.00806808, -0.04987472,  0.23069461,  0.1125838 ,
              0.16278384,  0.10275547,  0.15843748,  0.17516951,
              0.31897993,  0.08367777], dtype=float64)
```

### Sampling

You can also change the number of samples to extract (note: this will
trigger recompilation of the sample function, so you should not do this
in a hot loop) by changing {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.n_samples`, and
the number of discarded samples at the beginning of every markov chain by
changing {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.n_discard_per_chain`.

By default, {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.n_discard_per_chain` is 10% of
{py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.n_samples`.

The number of samples is then split among the number of chains/batches of the sampler.

```python
hilbert = nk.hilbert.Spin(0.5)**6

sampler = nk.sampler.MetropolisLocal(hilbert, n_chains=8)

vstate = nk.vqs.MCState(sampler, nk.models.RBM(), n_samples=500)

print(vstate.n_samples)
504

print(vstate.chain_length)
63

print(vstate.n_discard_per_chain)
50
```

You can see that 500 samples are split among 8 chains, giving $500/8=62.5$ (rounded to
the next largest integer, 63). Therefore 8 chains of length 63 will be run.
n_discard_per_chain gives the number of discarded steps taken in the markov chain before actually storing
them, so the Markov Chains are actually {code}`chain_length + n_discard_per_chain` long. The default
n_discard_per_chain is 10% of the total samples, but you can change that to any number.

(warn-mpi-sampling)=

:::{warning}
When running your code under MPI, the length of the chain is computed not only by dividing the
total number of samples by {code}`n_chains`, but also by diving it by the number of MPI processes.

Therefore, considering the number from the example above, if we had 4 MPI processes, we would have
found a chain length of $500/(8*4) = 15.625 \rightarrow 16$.
:::

### Collecting the state-vector

A variational state can be evaluated on the whole Hilbert space in order to obtain
the ket it represents.

This is achieved by using the {py:meth}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState.to_array` method,
which by defaults normalises the $L_2$ norm of the vector to 1 (but can be turned off).

Mixed state Ansätze can be converted to their matrix representation with
{py:meth}`~netket.vqs.MCMixedState.to_matrix`. In this case, the default
normalisation sets the trace to 1.

### Manipulating the parameters

You can access the parameters of a variational state through the {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState.parameters` attribute.
Similarly, if your model has also a mutable state, you can access it through
the {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState.model_state` attribute.

Parameters are stored as a Flax {code}`FrozenDict`, which behaves like a standard python dictionary but cannot be modified.
In Jax jargon, Parameters are a PyTree (see [PyTree documentation](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pytrees.html)) and they
can be operated upon with functions like [jax.tree_map](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.tree_util.html?highlight=tree_map#jax.tree_util.tree_map).

You can also modify the parameters by \_unfreezing\_ them, using the command `flax.core.unfreeze`.

```python
import flax

pars = flax.core.unfreeze(varstate.parameters)

pars['Dense']['kernel'] = pars['Dense']['kernel'] +1

varstate.parameters = pars
```

The parameter dict will be automatically frozen upon assignment.

## Saving and Loading a Variational State

Variational States conform to the [Flax serialization interface](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.serialization.html) and can be serialized and deserialized with it.

Moreover, the Json Logger {class}`~netket.logging.JsonLog` serializes the variational state
through that interface.

A simple example to serialize data is provided below:

```python
# construct an RBM model on 10 spins
vstate = nk.vqs.MCState(nk.sampler.MetropolisLocal(nk.hilbert.Spin(0.5)**10),
                                nk.models.RBM())

import flax

with open("test.mpack", 'wb') as file:
  file.write(flax.serialization.to_bytes(vstate))
```

And here we de-serialize it:

```python
# construct a new RBM model on 10 spins
vstate = nk.vqs.MCState(nk.sampler.MetropolisLocal(nk.hilbert.Spin(0.5)**10),
                                nk.models.RBM())

# load
with open("test.mpack", 'rb') as file:
  vstate = flax.serialization.from_bytes(vstate, file.read())
```

Note that this also serializes the state of the sampler.

:::{note}
The JSonLog serializer only serializes the parameters of the model, and not the whole variational state.
Therefore, if you wish to reload the parameters of a variational state, saved by the json logger, you should
use the same procedure outlined above, only that the list line should be:

```python
with open("parameters.mpack", 'rb') as file:
  vstate.variables = flax.serialization.from_bytes(vstate.variables, file.read())
```
:::

## Using FullSumState for testing

In order to check the performance of a given model on small test systems, it is possible to use {class}`~netket.vqs.FullSumState` which can be used in place of {class}`~netket.vqs.MCState` and computes quantities not by stochastic sampling but by evaluation of the ansatz over the full Hilbert space basis. (Therefore, it is infeasible to use for system sizes beyond ED.)
This can be helpful to diagnose potential errors arising from Monte Carlo sampling.

```python
> vs = nk.vqs.FullSumState(hilbert, nk.models.RBM())
```

Commit message:

Do not use `FrozenDict` in `MCState` anymore (#1547)
Flax deprecated frozendicts, so we may do as well.

If we just stop returning frozenDicts, an user might be able to change
parameters implicitly by editing the parameters

```python
vs = MCState(...)
pars = vs.parameters
pars['Dense']['Kernel'] = my_array

# now we have that
assert vs.parameters['Dense']['Kernel'] == my_array
# True
```

so to avoid doing that, we can just make sure that `vs.parameters`
always returns a copy of the underlying parameters (note that it's just
a copy of the dictionary, not a copy of the parameters themselves which
are immutable).
This comes at a small cost, but should prevent bugs from arising in user
code, and for large enough models this should be negligible.

The slowdown for an RBM is of the order of 1000
```python
In [1]: %timeit vs.parameters
2.1 µs ± 13.5 ns per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 100,000 loops each)

In [2]: %timeit vs._parameters
7.56 ns ± 0.0178 ns per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 100,000,000 loops each)
```
but I think this is largely irrelevant unless someone is accessing
parameters thousands of time per second without using them.

docs/docs/varstate.md, after:

# The Variational State Interface

A central element of NetKet is the {class}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState` interface.
A Variational State represents an approximate, variational description of a system, and can be used to
probe it.

As of now, NetKet has two types of Variational state implementations:

- {class}`~netket.vqs.MCState`, which is a classical variational approximation of a pure state.
- {class}`~netket.vqs.MCMixedState`, which is a classical variational approximation of a mixed state.
- {class}`~netket.vqs.FullSumState`, which is a version of {class}`~netket.vqs.MCState` without sampling, performing the full summation over the whole Hilbert space and computing expectation values and gradients exactly.

It is our plan to build upon this interface for new kind of variational states in the future. For example, we
are interested in implementing a new kind of variational state that encodes a state into a Qiskit circuit.

## Constructing a Variational State

To construct the two variational states above you need to provide at least a Monte Carlo sampler (you can find the list of available ones [here](netket_sampler_api)) and a model.
The Hilbert space of the variational state will be inferred from the sampler, which contains a reference to the underlying Hilbert space.

The model can be specified in several ways. The most standard way is to pass a [Flax Linen Module](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.linen.html#module), but you can also pass a Jax-style pair
of functions {code}`(init, apply)` or an haiku module obtained by calling {code}`haiku.transform()`.
It's also easy to use another jax-based framework with NetKet (though it's not yet documented). If you
want to do that, you can have a look at the automatic conversion [code](https://github.com/netket/netket/tree/master/netket/utils/model_frameworks) and get in touch with us.

:::{warning}
Initializing a Variational State with non-Flax modules is still experimental. Complex modules,
especially if mutable, might not work. If you have problems don't hesitate opening issues on
GitHub so that we can address them. They are mostly easy fixes.
:::

### Defining models: Flax

In general, the most-well supported way to define Models for NetKet is through Flax.

If you are not familiar with Flax, it's a package that allows to define Neural Networks or other
parametrized functions. While we suggest to read carefully the [introduction to Flax](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/flax_basics.html), if you are impatient and just want to define some simple, easy
models you can find some examples in the [Model Surgery](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/howtos/model_surgery.html) section of Flax documentation.

Other examples can be found in the source of the [Pre-built models](netket_models_api) distributed with NetKet, such as
{class}`~netket.models.RBM` (the simplest one), {class}`~netket.models.MPSPeriodic` and {class}`~netket.models.NDM` for
more complicated examples.

:::{warning}
Flax modules do not always work well with complex numbers. For that reason, if your model has complex
parameters we invite you to use {code}`netket.nn` in place of {code}`flax.linen` and {code}`flax.nn`.

{code}`netket.nn` re-exports some Flax functionality ensuring that it works nicely with complex numbers.
If you don't find something from Flax in {code}`netket.nn`, please [open an issue](https://github.com/netket/netket/issues) in GitHub.
:::

### MCState

Let's now assume we have a Flax module, {class}`~netket.models.RBM` and we want to construct a variational state
on sampled with a simple {func}`~netket.sampler.MetropolisLocal` sampler.

To do this, first you need to construct the model and the sampler, and then you can pass them, together with several
parameters, to the constructor.

```python
hilbert = nk.hilbert.Spin(0.5)**10

sampler = nk.sampler.MetropolisLocal(hilbert)

model = nk.models.RBM(alpha=1, param_dtype=float, kernel_init=nn.initializers.normal(stddev=0.01))

vstate = nk.vqs.MCState(sampler, model, n_samples=500)
```

When constructed, the variational state will call the model's init method to generate the state and the
parameters, and will also initialize the sampler.

When constructing a variational state you can also pass a seed, that will be used to initialize both the
weights and the sampler. You can also pass two different seeds for the sampler and the weights.

(warn-chunking)=

:::{warning}
Sometimes you might be working on very large models that run on GPUs, or you might want to compute expectation values with a very high number of samples, which might cause out-of-memory errors. To prevent this, {code}`MCState` exposes the attribute {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.chunk_size`, which controls the size of the chunks used in the forward and backward computation of expectation values.

When this value is set, computations are not performed on huge matrices, but instead we split the inputs into smaller matrices and loop through them. In general, setting {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.chunk_size` to a low value will address the majority of memory issues, but will increase the computational cost.

A value of at least 128 is suggested, but will greatly depend on your model. You should try to use the largest value you can for your system. Setting it to {code}`None` is equivalent to setting it to infinity.
:::

## Using a Monte Carlo Variational State

### Expectation values

One you have a variational state, you can do many things with it.
First of all, you can probe expectation values:

```
Ĥ = nk.operator.Ising(hilbert, nk.graph.Chain(hilbert.size), h=0.5)

vstate.expect(Ĥ)

>>> -4.98 ± 0.14 [σ²=9.51, R̂=1.0006]
```

Notice that if you call multiple times {code}`expect`, the same set of
samples will be used, and you will get the same result. To force sampling
to happen again, you can call {py:meth}`~netket.vqs.MCState.sample`.

```
vstate.expect(Ĥ)

>>> -4.98 ± 0.14 [σ²=9.51, R̂=1.0006]

vstate.sample();

vstate.expect(Ĥ)

>>> -4.90 ± 0.14 [σ²=9.54, R̂=1.0062]
```

The set of the last sampled samples can be accessed from the attribute
{py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.samples`. If you access the samples
from this attribute, but you haven't sampled already, {code}`sample()` will
be called automatically.

Note that when you update the parameters, the samples are automatically
discarded.

Parameters can be accessed through the attribute {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState.parameters`,
and you can modify them by assigning a new set of parameters to this attribute.

Note that parameters cannot in general be modified in place, as they are
of type `FrozenDict` (they are frozen, aka can't be modified). A typical way
to modify them, for example to add 0.1 to all parameters is to do the following:

```python
import jax

# See the value of some parameters
vstate.parameters['visible_bias']

>>> DeviceArray([-0.10806808, -0.14987472,  0.13069461,  0.0125838 ,
              0.06278384,  0.00275547,  0.05843748,  0.07516951,
              0.21897993, -0.01632223], dtype=float64)

vstate.parameters = jax.tree_map(lambda x: x+0.1, vstate.parameters)

# Look at the new values
vstate.parameters['visible_bias']
>>> DeviceArray([-0.00806808, -0.04987472,  0.23069461,  0.1125838 ,
              0.16278384,  0.10275547,  0.15843748,  0.17516951,
              0.31897993,  0.08367777], dtype=float64)
```

### Sampling

You can also change the number of samples to extract (note: this will
trigger recompilation of the sample function, so you should not do this
in a hot loop) by changing {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.n_samples`, and
the number of discarded samples at the beginning of every markov chain by
changing {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.n_discard_per_chain`.

By default, {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.n_discard_per_chain` is 10% of
{py:attr}`~netket.vqs.MCState.n_samples`.

The number of samples is then split among the number of chains/batches of the sampler.

```python
hilbert = nk.hilbert.Spin(0.5)**6

sampler = nk.sampler.MetropolisLocal(hilbert, n_chains=8)

vstate = nk.vqs.MCState(sampler, nk.models.RBM(), n_samples=500)

print(vstate.n_samples)
504

print(vstate.chain_length)
63

print(vstate.n_discard_per_chain)
50
```

You can see that 500 samples are split among 8 chains, giving $500/8=62.5$ (rounded to
the next largest integer, 63). Therefore 8 chains of length 63 will be run.
n_discard_per_chain gives the number of discarded steps taken in the markov chain before actually storing
them, so the Markov Chains are actually {code}`chain_length + n_discard_per_chain` long. The default
n_discard_per_chain is 10% of the total samples, but you can change that to any number.

(warn-mpi-sampling)=

:::{warning}
When running your code under MPI, the length of the chain is computed not only by dividing the
total number of samples by {code}`n_chains`, but also by diving it by the number of MPI processes.

Therefore, considering the number from the example above, if we had 4 MPI processes, we would have
found a chain length of $500/(8*4) = 15.625 \rightarrow 16$.
:::

### Collecting the state-vector

A variational state can be evaluated on the whole Hilbert space in order to obtain
the ket it represents.

This is achieved by using the {py:meth}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState.to_array` method,
which by defaults normalises the $L_2$ norm of the vector to 1 (but can be turned off).

Mixed state Ansätze can be converted to their matrix representation with
{py:meth}`~netket.vqs.MCMixedState.to_matrix`. In this case, the default
normalisation sets the trace to 1.

### Manipulating the parameters

:::{note}
This guide refers to NetKet version `>=3.9.2` and Flax version `>=0.7.2`. Older NetKet and flax versions returned `FronzenDict` for the parameters, which were more complicated to use. 
For a migration guide from the old behaviour to the new one, refer to the [Flax frozen dictionary migration guide](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/guides/regular_dict_upgrade_guide.html).
:::

You can access the parameters of a variational state through the {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState.parameters` attribute.
Similarly, if your model has also a mutable state, you can access it through
the {py:attr}`~netket.vqs.VariationalState.model_state` attribute.

Parameters are stored as a set of nested dictionaries.
In Jax jargon, Parameters are a PyTree (see [PyTree documentation](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pytrees.html)) and they
can be operated upon with functions like [jax.tree_map](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.tree_util.html?highlight=tree_map#jax.tree_util.tree_map).

Before modifying the parameters or what is stored inside of a dictionary of parameters, it is a good idea to make a copy using {func}`flax.core.copy`, which calls recursively `{}.copy()` in all nested dictionaries. 
If you do not do this, you will only copy the outermost dictionary but the inner ones will be referenced, and so modifying them will modify the original parameters as well.

```python
import flax

pars = flax.core.copy(varstate.parameters, {})

pars['Dense']['kernel'] = pars['Dense']['kernel'] +1

varstate.parameters = pars
```

The parameter dict will be automatically frozen upon assignment.

## Saving and Loading a Variational State

Variational States conform to the [Flax serialization interface](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.serialization.html) and can be serialized and deserialized with it.

Moreover, the Json Logger {class}`~netket.logging.JsonLog` serializes the variational state
through that interface.

A simple example to serialize data is provided below:

```python
# construct an RBM model on 10 spins
vstate = nk.vqs.MCState(nk.sampler.MetropolisLocal(nk.hilbert.Spin(0.5)**10),
                                nk.models.RBM())

import flax

with open("test.mpack", 'wb') as file:
  file.write(flax.serialization.to_bytes(vstate))
```

And here we de-serialize it:

```python
# construct a new RBM model on 10 spins
vstate = nk.vqs.MCState(nk.sampler.MetropolisLocal(nk.hilbert.Spin(0.5)**10),
                                nk.models.RBM())

# load
with open("test.mpack", 'rb') as file:
  vstate = flax.serialization.from_bytes(vstate, file.read())
```

Note that this also serializes the state of the sampler.

:::{note}
The JSonLog serializer only serializes the parameters of the model, and not the whole variational state.
Therefore, if you wish to reload the parameters of a variational state, saved by the json logger, you should
use the same procedure outlined above, only that the list line should be:

```python
with open("parameters.mpack", 'rb') as file:
  vstate.variables = flax.serialization.from_bytes(vstate.variables, file.read())
```
:::

## Using FullSumState for testing

In order to check the performance of a given model on small test systems, it is possible to use {class}`~netket.vqs.FullSumState` which can be used in place of {class}`~netket.vqs.MCState` and computes quantities not by stochastic sampling but by evaluation of the ansatz over the full Hilbert space basis. (Therefore, it is infeasible to use for system sizes beyond ED.)
This can be helpful to diagnose potential errors arising from Monte Carlo sampling.

```python
> vs = nk.vqs.FullSumState(hilbert, nk.models.RBM())
```
