docs/api/api-experimental.md, before:

# Experimental API

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

In this page we present some experimental interfaces of NetKet.
Those are not guaranteed to be API-stable, and might change without notice (other than the
changelog) among minor releases.
The [netket.experimental](api-experimental) module mirrors the standard {ref}`netket <netket_api>` module structure,
and we suggest to use it as follows:

```python
import netket as nk
import netket.experimental as nkx
```

(experimental-qsr-api)=
## Quantum State Reconstruction
The Quantum State Reconstruction algorithm performs an approximate tomographic reconstruction of measurement data coming from a quantum computer (or similar device) using a Pure or Mixed quantum state.

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/qsr
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   QSR
```

(experimental-sampler-api)=
## Samplers

This module contains the Metropolis Parallel Tempered sampler.
This sampler is experimental because we believe it to be correct, but our tests
fail. We believe it to be a false negative: possibly the implementation of the
sampler is correct, but the test is too tight.
Until we will have verified this hypothesis and updated the tests in order not
to fail, we provide the current implementation as-is, in the hope that some
contributor might take up that work.

The other experimental sampler is MetropolisSamplerPmap, which makes use of {func}`jax.pmap`
to use different GPUs/CPUs without having to use MPI. It should scale much better over
several CPUs, but you have to start jax with a specific environment variable.

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/samplers
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   sampler.MetropolisPtSampler
   sampler.MetropolisLocalPt
   sampler.MetropolisExchangePt

   sampler.MetropolisSamplerPmap
```

(experimental-logging-api)=
## Logging

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental

```

This module contains experimental loggers that can be used with the optimization drivers.


```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/logging
   :nosignatures:

   logging.HDF5Log

```

(experimental-variational-api)=
## Variational State Interface

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
  :toctree: _generated/experimental/variational
  :nosignatures:

  vqs.variables_from_file
  vqs.variables_from_tar

```

## Time Evolution Driver

````{admonition} Apple ARM (M1) processors 
:class: warning

Those drivers are automatically jitted with `jax.jit`. To disable jitting set 
```python
netket.config.netket_disable_ode_jit = True
```
or set the equivalent environment variable.

````


```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
  :toctree: _generated/experimental/dynamics
  :nosignatures:

  TDVP
  driver.TDVPSchmitt
```

## ODE Integrators

This is a collection of ODE integrators that can be used with the TDVP driver above.

````{admonition} Apple ARM (M1) processors 
:class: warning

Those drivers are automatically jitted with `jax.jit`. To disable jitting set 
```python
netket.config.netket_disable_ode_jit = True
```
or set the equivalent environment variable.

````

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/dynamics
   :nosignatures:

   dynamics.Euler
   dynamics.Heun
   dynamics.Midpoint
   dynamics.RK12
   dynamics.RK23
   dynamics.RK4
   dynamics.RK45
```

## Fermions

This modules contains hilbert space and operator implementations of fermions in second quantization.
It is experimental until it has been thoroughly tested by the community, meaning feedback is welcome.

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/hilbert
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   hilbert.SpinOrbitalFermions
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/operator
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   operator.FermionOperator2nd
   operator.fermion.create
   operator.fermion.destroy
   operator.fermion.number
```

## Observables
This module contains various observables that can be computed starting from various variational states.

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/observable
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   observable.Renyi2EntanglementEntropy
```

Commit message:

Implementation of kernelSR (#1623)
This PR implements the kernel formulation of Stochastic Reconfiguration.

We provide a new driver, `netket.experimental.VMC_SRt,`. It reproduces
**exactly** the dynamics of the standard `netket.driver.VMC` with
`nk.optimizer.SR(solver=netket.optimizer.solver.solvers.solve))`, but
with the inversion of N_samples x N_samples matrix instead of a N_params
x N_params one. We add a test (test/driver/test_srt.py) to show that
this is the case.


Co-authored-by: Filippo Vicentini <filippovicentini@gmail.com>

docs/api/api-experimental.md, after:

# Experimental API

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

In this page we present some experimental interfaces of NetKet.
Those are not guaranteed to be API-stable, and might change without notice (other than the
changelog) among minor releases.
The [netket.experimental](api-experimental) module mirrors the standard {ref}`netket <netket_api>` module structure,
and we suggest to use it as follows:

```python
import netket as nk
import netket.experimental as nkx
```

(experimental-drivers-api)=
## Drivers
Currently NetKet offers an experimental driver implementing Stochastic Reconfiguration with the [kernel trick](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05715) 
(originally introduced under the name of [minSR by Ao Chen and Markus Heyl](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.01941)). This is slightly more limited in
features than the standard Stochastic Reconfiguration implementation of {class}`netket.drivers.VMC`, but can scale to millions of parameters

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/driver
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   driver.VMC_SRt
```


(experimental-qsr-api)=
## Quantum State Reconstruction
The Quantum State Reconstruction algorithm performs an approximate tomographic reconstruction of measurement data coming from a quantum computer (or similar device) using a Pure or Mixed quantum state.

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/qsr
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   QSR
```

(experimental-sampler-api)=
## Samplers

This module contains the Metropolis Parallel Tempered sampler.
This sampler is experimental because we believe it to be correct, but our tests
fail. We believe it to be a false negative: possibly the implementation of the
sampler is correct, but the test is too tight.
Until we will have verified this hypothesis and updated the tests in order not
to fail, we provide the current implementation as-is, in the hope that some
contributor might take up that work.

The other experimental sampler is MetropolisSamplerPmap, which makes use of {func}`jax.pmap`
to use different GPUs/CPUs without having to use MPI. It should scale much better over
several CPUs, but you have to start jax with a specific environment variable.

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/samplers
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   sampler.MetropolisPtSampler
   sampler.MetropolisLocalPt
   sampler.MetropolisExchangePt

   sampler.MetropolisSamplerPmap
```

(experimental-logging-api)=
## Logging

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental

```

This module contains experimental loggers that can be used with the optimization drivers.


```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/logging
   :nosignatures:

   logging.HDF5Log

```

(experimental-variational-api)=
## Variational State Interface

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
  :toctree: _generated/experimental/variational
  :nosignatures:

  vqs.variables_from_file
  vqs.variables_from_tar

```

## Time Evolution Driver

````{admonition} Apple ARM (M1) processors 
:class: warning

Those drivers are automatically jitted with `jax.jit`. To disable jitting set 
```python
netket.config.netket_disable_ode_jit = True
```
or set the equivalent environment variable.

````


```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
  :toctree: _generated/experimental/dynamics
  :nosignatures:

  TDVP
  driver.TDVPSchmitt
```

## ODE Integrators

This is a collection of ODE integrators that can be used with the TDVP driver above.

````{admonition} Apple ARM (M1) processors 
:class: warning

Those drivers are automatically jitted with `jax.jit`. To disable jitting set 
```python
netket.config.netket_disable_ode_jit = True
```
or set the equivalent environment variable.

````

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/dynamics
   :nosignatures:

   dynamics.Euler
   dynamics.Heun
   dynamics.Midpoint
   dynamics.RK12
   dynamics.RK23
   dynamics.RK4
   dynamics.RK45
```

## Fermions

This modules contains hilbert space and operator implementations of fermions in second quantization.
It is experimental until it has been thoroughly tested by the community, meaning feedback is welcome.

```{eval-rst}
.. currentmodule:: netket.experimental
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/hilbert
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   hilbert.SpinOrbitalFermions
```

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/operator
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   operator.FermionOperator2nd
   operator.fermion.create
   operator.fermion.destroy
   operator.fermion.number
```

## Observables
This module contains various observables that can be computed starting from various variational states.

```{eval-rst}
.. autosummary::
   :toctree: _generated/experimental/observable
   :template: class
   :nosignatures:

   observable.Renyi2EntanglementEntropy
```
